Fox News alert, we have a deal. For now.
From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams
and this is The Daily. [music] The US
and Iran have both confirmed that they
have agreed to a two-week pause.
>> Appears Iran has accepted President
Trump's [music] terms.
>> Subject to the immediate opening of the
Strait.
>> Just in out of Iran, a statement read on
state-run media instructing all military
units to follow [music] the supreme
leader's order and stop firing. Just
hours before a Trump-imposed deadline
that could have led to a massive
escalation in the war with Iran. The
United States and Iran appear to reach a
temporary ceasefire.
Today,
chief White House correspondent David
Sanger explains what led to this
last-minute deal
and what it would take to make it stick.
It's Wednesday, April 8th. [music]
David Sanger, thank you so much for
taping with us at 9:35 p.m. on this
Tuesday night. It's been a wild day,
Rachel.
I can imagine. David, it feels like the
entire world has been holding its breath
for the last 2 days
as President Trump ratcheted up the
threats on Iran to open the Straits of
Hormuz, which included Tuesday morning
when he basically threatened to wipe out
the entire country.
And just hours before the 8:00 p.m.
deadline that the President had given
Iran to make a deal, both the United
States and Iran announced that they'd
reached some kind of temporary
ceasefire.
What do we know about what they actually
agreed to?
Well, we've been trying to sort that out
because the American accounts and the
Iranian accounts, as you might imagine,
don't completely match up.
But what President Trump said was that
Iran and the US have agreed to a 14-day
ceasefire.
During that time, he said,
Iran would commit to making sure that
the Strait of Hormuz would be fully
reopened. Mhm. And that that would allow
this bottleneck of ships full of oil,
full of fertilizer, full of helium for
semiconductor production to begin
flowing again and relieve these huge
shortages that have been racking the
world economy.
We don't know exactly when that will
happen,
but the American bombing of Iran stopped
almost immediately.
Okay, so that is what Trump agreed to,
David, but you mentioned that it did not
really seem like both sides were on the
same page when the ceasefire was first
announced. What have the Iranians said
that they agreed to? Well, if you just
read President Trump's announcement,
you'd think that they Strait of Hormuz
was just being thrown wide open the way
it was before the war started.
But if you read the statement that came
out a few minutes later from Iran's
foreign minister, Abbas Aragachi, who's
quite experienced, has been involved in
many of these negotiations over the
years, he said that Iran will cease
their defensive operation for a period
of 2 weeks
and that safe passage through the Strait
of Hormuz would only be possible
by coordinating with Iran's armed
forces.
So, that means that in the Iranian
vision,
the Iranian military will retain the
control that it seized in the past five
or six weeks
and who knows at what pace they're going
to allow ships to pass, whether or not
they're going to allow them to just pass
freely or charge them tolls,
we just don't know.
Okay, so obviously some daylight between
these two statements, room for
interpretation,
but we have not talked about another
country that is a major actor here and
that is Israel. Israel, of course,
attacked Iran along with the United
States. That is how this war started.
Has Israel said anything about this
agreement? Do we know that they are
party to it? Where do they stand? Well,
the White House told us that Israel had
agreed to the terms and then
later in the evening, the Israelis
turned out a statement from the Prime
Minister's office saying they support
President Trump's decision.
But it was interesting wording because
they didn't say that they were terribly
enthused about it.
I just want to step back for a second,
David, because it feels kind of stunning
that literally just a few hours ago this
threat to wipe out an entire country was
on the table. The two sides weren't even
talking to each other.
We had no idea what this threat meant.
It just sort of felt like any possible
option was on the table until very, very
recently.
So, how did we get to this point where
we are now with both sides having
reached a temporary ceasefire agreement?
Well, Rachel, you'll remember as we've
discussed on earlier shows the President
was feeling more and more pressure as
the effects of the closing of the Strait
of Hormuz was spreading around the
world. So, at first he lashed out and he
said to the Iranians, "You have 48 hours
to get the Strait back open." And the
Iranians kind of ignored him.
And then starting on March 26th,
he said, "Okay, there are 10 days to get
a negotiation going."
So, he set this 10-day clock
essentially to Tuesday evening at 8:00
p.m. But as the weekend approached, the
Iranians were ignoring him. There was
very little communication underway. Mhm.
And the Iranians were mocking the
President on social media for all of his
changing deadlines.
Then this all got interrupted by a
sudden crisis that distracted everyone
from all of this. This was, of course,
the shoot-down of the F-15E fighter jet
on Friday.
The pilot and the weapons officer both
ejected and no one could find the
weapons officer.
Right, that was actually the subject of
Tuesday's episode, this unbelievably
daring, costly rescue operation of this
weapons officer
which they pulled off on Saturday.
And that, as our colleague Eric Schmitt
told us, seems to have emboldened
President Trump as he sort of begins to
pick up where he left off with these
negotiations and threats with Iran.
That's exactly right. And remember
before the shoot-down of the plane,
the President had hinted that if the
Iranians don't relent, he was going to
begin to go after power plants, he said.
>> Mhm. And he suggested other
infrastructure.
And the Iranians came back and basically
said, "If you wipe out our power plants,
you can say goodbye to the power plants
around the Gulf." Of course, all of this
was put aside during the hunt for the
missing airman,
but by Sunday morning,
Easter Sunday,
the President was over the high of
retrieving the colonel
and he was right back in his set of
demands.
And that's what turned out to be
the first of two truly bizarre social
media posts. And what was that post?
Well, I'll read it to you, Rachel.
"Tuesday will be power plant day and
bridge day all wrapped up in one in
Iran.
Open the [__] Strait, you crazy
bastards, or you'll be living in hell.
Just watch."
So,
we'll set aside for a moment the pretty
undiplomatic language.
It actually led people to believe that
the President might be willing to go
escalate and escalate significantly
in a way that would get us even deeper
into this war.
So, basically by Sunday, it sounds like
two very important things have happened.
One is that the White House is crowing
from this huge victory of rescuing this
airman in this daring operation,
but countering that is the fact that the
President is still not getting what he
wants from Iran. And as you mentioned,
the tension is ratcheting up.
And this Tuesday night deadline is
looming and they are barreling toward
it.
That's exactly right. And on Monday,
the President dug the hole even deeper.
First, he went out on the South Lawn
during what's usually the very charming
Easter egg roll with children running
around, and standing next to the Easter
Bunny, he began to ratchet up the
threats to Iran and talk about the
depths into which he would destroy their
infrastructure. And then he began to
say, "You know, we will destroy Iran's
bridges, their electric power plants,
and so forth, and we will do it in hours
on a scale no one has ever seen before."
It was more specific and therefore it
seemed again like it was ratcheting up
this rhetoric. That's right. And here in
the office, we were asking the same
question that was being asked all over
the country, which is
was he truly determined to go that much
deeper into an unpopular war?
Or was he simply using these threats as
a tactic to try to see if he could get
the Iranian system moving. And then
Tuesday morning, just as people were
pouring their coffee at a little after
8:00 in the morning,
comes another social media message that
actually rivaled
the Sunday one. Let me read that one to
you, too, Rachel. Please.
>> A whole civilization will die tonight,
never to be brought back again. I don't
want that to happen, but it probably
will.
However, now that we have complete and
total regime change where different,
smarter, less radicalized minds prevail,
maybe something revolutionarily
wonderful can happen. Who knows? We'll
find out tonight.
>> [snorts]
>> Even for a president that breaks norms
all the time in terms of how he speaks
to the public and the threats that he
makes, the rhetoric that he makes,
this social media post was far beyond
anything we had ever heard Trump say
before. This was a threat to wipe out 90
million people. That's right, Rachel. Or
certainly that's how I think we read it
and most everyone read it.
And it suggested many different things.
I mean, the first is the president
wasn't simply discussing defeating the
Iranian government or going after
nuclear sites here. He was talking about
committing what would essentially be a
huge war crime. Mhm.
>> And there was response all over the
place. I think that Trump has lost his
mind.
>> He is unfit to serve as our president.
>> He's not capable of being the president.
>> Democrats, of course, were calling for
invoking the 25th Amendment, you know,
in which the cabinet meets and
determines that the president is unable
to carry [music] out his duties and
temporarily puts the vice president in
place.
>> His cabinet has a responsibility.
>> And we need to be invoking the 25th
[music] Amendment.
>> be removed using Amendment immediately.
But it wasn't just Democrats.
>> How do we 25th Amendment this ass? Even
within the MAGA movement, there were
great critics of this. Alex Jones
>> The problem is to get the 25th Amendment
harder than impeachment. You have to get
2/3 of the house and 2/3 of the Senate
to override.
>> Uh tackle Trump uh and and pretend let
him pretend he's president and publicly
[music] uh report that he's going
through a health issue and Vance take
over. It literally needs to be something
like that. It's that bad.
>> Marjorie Taylor Green and Candace Owens
who were talking about the 25th
Amendment.
>> Candace Owens says the 25th Amendment
needs to be invoked. He is a genocidal
lunatic.
>> Tucker Carlson called Mr. Trump's post
vile.
>> It is vile on every level.
>> And suggested that
>> Those people
who are in direct contact with the
president need to say, "No.
I'll resign." Maybe people shouldn't be
following these kinds of orders.
>> I'll do whatever I can do legally to
stop this because this is insane. And if
given the order, I'm not carrying it
out.
>> And then there were some like Senator
Ron Johnson of Wisconsin
who's usually a little more reticent
about criticizing the president, who
said, "This simply is not how Americans
speak and how presidents ought to
speak."
>> I do not want to see us start blowing up
civilian infrastructure. I do not want
to see that. But we we are not at war
with the Iranian people.
Yeah, we we we are trying to liberate
them.
So, by the end of the day, David, what
have you and our colleagues learned
about how real this threat is? Like, is
there evidence that the military has
mobilized in any way to launch any kind
of massive attack? Well, we saw lots of
mobilization
of aircraft moving from the United
States to Europe and Europe on to the
Middle East, but we've been seeing that
for the past 5 weeks. So, it was hard to
tell whether this was more of the same
or a true escalation. But certainly
there were so many American forces in
the Middle East that if the president
wanted to make good on this threat, he
could. And of course, the clock was
ticking all day on Tuesday.
>> [music]
>> But we were still hearing the echoes of
some kind of negotiation [music] taking
place indirectly through the Pakistani
foreign minister and the Pakistani prime
minister.
And then [music] at a little after 6:00,
the president announced that he was once
again calling a timeout here.
Suddenly, there was a ceasefire,
a new 2-week-long deadline,
>> [music]
>> and everyone from market investors to
the military
to many around the Gulf just breathed a
huge sigh of relief.
We'll be right back.
So, David, as you described, this moment
of ceasefire seems to be this huge
relief. But how real does this deal
actually feel? And what does it actually
mean? Well, it could mean the end of
this war
or it could mean just a brief pause.
Ceasefires are fragile by nature.
We're going to have to see if anybody
violates it and even if they have the
discipline to keep it in place, we have
to determine if the traffic that's going
through the Strait of Hormuz is getting
back to what it was before February 28th
when the fighting broke out.
And of course, we're going to be in a
situation now where the Iranian military
actually still controls who's going
through the strait. That wasn't the case
back in February. Right. For the
president, he said basically it's got to
go back to the way it was.
But the fact of the matter is the
Iranians have now discovered this is
their greatest leverage and it's not a
power they are likely to give up anytime
soon. So, was that the biggest test of
the ceasefire whether we see all these
ships going through the strait?
That's the immediate test of the
ceasefire. But remember, the ceasefire
is only the means to an end. And its
purpose is to allow the time and space
to go negotiate on the bigger issues.
Mhm. It took 2 and 1/2 years, Rachel, to
negotiate the 2015 agreement between the
Obama administration and the Iranians.
And that was in peacetime.
You can imagine how difficult it will be
now at a moment when the Iranians feel
like this war left them empowered. To
that point, at the outset of the war,
the US said that one of its big reasons
for going to war was in fact to, among
other reasons, keep Iran from making a
nuclear weapon.
That feels very absent from these
discussions. Why is that? Well, the
nuclear weapons issue is presumably the
first issue they're going to have to
take up in these negotiations over the
next 2 weeks.
And it's going to be hard.
And the reason it's going to be hard is,
first of all, the president himself has
been all over the map here.
Before the war broke out, he said the
United States cannot tolerate Iran
having any nuclear material, any of its
stockpile left in the country. It all
had to go.
Then about a week and a half ago, he
said, "You know, I don't really care.
It's buried so deep, we can watch it by
satellite." And now it's likely he's
back to the negotiating position they
were taking before the war, which is
Iran cannot be left with any nuclear
material.
And if the president left a significant
amount of near-bomb grade uranium in
Iran,
he would be getting less out of the
Iranians than Barack Obama got out of
them in 2015.
And frankly, it's hard to imagine that
the president wants to read that he went
to war with Iran
and didn't get
the material that was the reason for
this conflict at the start. Well, that
makes me wonder about the effectiveness
of these talks overall and how we should
be thinking about them.
The threat to annihilate a whole
country,
is that something that brought them to
the table for a meaningful negotiations
to end the war and get demands that the
United States actually wanted? Or is
this ceasefire just a temporary
de-escalation that serves to save face
more than anything else?
It gains nothing we didn't have before
the war began. But I think you have to
give credit to the president because
this ratcheting up of pressure certainly
played some role in forcing an
agreement.
It's not clear whether or not it
actually terrified the Iranians because
their decision-making process is so
spread out among the military and the
clerics and so forth, it's not clear who
was making these decisions. But it
certainly scared the region.
And I think it scared the Chinese who
were highly dependent on oil moving
through the strait.
So, there were pressure points that the
president was able to take advantage of.
David, on the off chance that this
temporary ceasefire leads to a permanent
ceasefire,
what will the White House What will the
United States have actually gained from
all of this?
Look, I think the United States and the
Israelis have accomplished a lot.
They took out in the opening hours of
the war the supreme leader. They
devastated levels of the military and
intelligence
and nuclear establishment.
They set back the missile program and
the missile production program.
But if this ceasefire essentially
becomes permanent with no change in Iran
beyond
the restoration of traffic in the Strait
of Hormuz,
then the White House will have
accomplished virtually none of its major
goals.
The country is still run
by a military and theocratic group of
elites who have terrorized their own
population.
They still have their nuclear material
and could in theory try to go rebuild
and race for a bomb.
They still have missile supplies and
drones, not on the scale that they did
before the attacks, but we've learned
that they could rebuild fairly quickly.
And most importantly, I think, they
still have a sense
that they were able to stand up to the
United States and Israel
and resist against a much larger
invading force.
>> [snorts]
>> David, we've talked on the show quite a
bit about how you can't put everything
back together that has been broken by
this war. Meaning that the economic
impacts, the political impacts, are not
going to just go back to the status quo.
Even if the war ends tonight or in 2
weeks, so much infrastructure has been
destroyed, so much has been done to make
these impacts ripple for potentially
years to come.
And so I wonder what consequences
specifically
you think, as of this moment, feel like
they are enduring?
Well, a few things. First of all, the
Iranians have discovered that they have
a greater power than they knew
over
commerce around the world.
Second, the Gulf states feel more
vulnerable. They built these
big, beautiful cities full of
skyscrapers
and they've entered the 21st century and
what do they discover?
That the Iranians can put missiles
through their windows and through their
desalination plants.
>> Mhm. The world economy feels more
fragile because we've discovered yet
another supply chain vulnerability. And
we've discovered that while the United
States thought one more time that it had
gotten out of the Middle East, an
explicit goal in the president's
national security strategy that came out
last fall,
in fact, it's been sucked back in on a
scale [clears throat] few could have
imagined even a few months ago. And I
think there's a a last thing we've
learned.
The world never really approved of the
amount of power the United States has
had,
but it's usually signed up to the
thought that the US was fundamentally a
benevolent superpower in the past.
And yet, I think we lost a lot of that
reputation
in this attack on Iran.
That there was a sense that the
president was never committed to the
February diplomacy.
That there was a sense that he thought
he could topple a weak regime.
That he could go out and threaten the
lives of 92 million people [music]
and that the threat came from a
president who oversees the world's most
powerful military.
And so eventually gas prices will come
down and eventually [music]
oil will flow more naturally
and over time the damage of the war will
be rebuilt the way it was in Japan and
Germany and Vietnam.
But whether the world ever views the
United States quite [music] the way
it did before this happened,
I'm not sure that's going to be back for
a long time.
David Sanger, [music]
thank you so much.
Thank you, Rachel.
We'll be right [music] back.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
Shelly Kittelson, an American journalist
who was abducted in Baghdad by an Iraqi
militia aligned with Iran, was freed on
Tuesday after a [music] week in
captivity.
Kittelson has reported on the Middle
East for more than a decade for various
news outlets.
And she was set free in exchange for the
release of several [music] imprisoned
members of the militia.
The kidnapping comes amid growing
anxieties about Iranian-backed militias
attacking American targets [music]
since the United States and Israel-led
war with Iran began.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Michael
Simon Johnson, Olivia Nat, and Muj
Zaidy. [music]
It was edited by MJ Davis Lynn with help
from Paige Cowett.
Contains music by [music] Marion Lozano,
Alicia Bitu, and Dan Powell. Our theme
music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
Special thanks to Afim Shapiro.
>> [music]
>> That's it [music] for the daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.
>> [music]